Today’s tensions
How much is your mood today affecting your view of tomorrow?
Most CEOs highlight their concerns over the world economy. About 78% of India CEOs,
73% of global CEOs and 69% of Asia Pacific CEOs believe that global economic growth will
decline over the next 12 months.
But our survey also indicates that despite the gloomy global outlook, India CEOs are hopeful
about the country’s economic growth: More than five in ten CEOs (57%) express optimism
about India’s economy over the next 12 months. In comparison, only 37% of Asia Pacific
CEOs and 29% of global CEOs expect economic growth to improve in their countries or
regions over the next 12 months.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 13
CEOs in many major economies are optimistic about the growth prospects of their
countries
78% 73%
45%
84%
65%
76%
63% 63%
82%
71%
28% 27%
18%
73%
53%
71%
62%
70%
94%
84%
India Brazil China US Japan Canada Italy France Germany UK
More optimistic about territory growth More optimistic about global growth
Decline in global growth Decline in territory growth
The responses of India CEOs mark a dramatic shift from the mood in 2021, when 99% said
India’s economic growth would improve over the next 12 months. The reasons are not far to
seek. When the 25th Annual Global CEO Survey was being conducted in October–November
2021, it seemed the worst of the pandemic was over. But within weeks of fieldwork closing,
news of the highly transmissible Omicron variant of SARS-CoV-2 broke out. When the
present survey was conducted in 2022, the world was already reeling under the impact of the
conflict in Europe and other macroeconomic issues.
India Asia Pacific Global

57% of India CEOs are optimistic about India’s economic growth over the next 12 months.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 14
The next steps
While it may be good to err on the side of caution, it is important that CEOs stay optimistic
about the future. What is needed then is:
.an approach to combat bias in the boardroom by soliciting views through independent
consultation or questionnaires
.discussions that are structured to consider overlooked possibilities
.assigning a devil’s advocate role for critical discussions.
How do your resilience and workforce strategies fit together?
The survey makes it clear that measures are being taken, or being planned, to meet the
challenges of the future. Cost cuts are high on the priority list everywhere, with about 93% of
India CEOs saying that they are cutting, have cut or are considering cutting operating costs
and spurring revenue growth to mitigate economic challenges and volatility. About 85%,
however, stress they will not reduce the size of their workforce, and 96% state they do not
plan to reduce compensation – demonstrating their resolve to retain talent.
Reducing operating costs and diversifying products/services are top priorities for

26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 15
Employee attrition is another issue that confronts CEOs. The survey shows that India CEOs
are divided, with 32% saying attrition rates will continue to increase slightly, moderately and
significantly, and 34% holding that there will be no change. But this may be a bigger concern
than is now being felt.
A marginally larger percentage (36%) of global CEOs believes that employee attrition is likely
to increase slightly, moderately and significantly. A heartening observation is that globally,
60% emphasise that they do not plan to reduce the size of their workforce.
According to PwC’s India Workforce Hopes and Fears Survey 2022,10 the changing dynamics
between the employer and employee over the past couple of years have modified the
workplace. Today, employers are more focused on building a resilient workforce strategy that
balances acting with speed and adaptability to position for scale.
Employees, on their part, place a premium on organisational trust, values and innovation,
and these attributes are closely aligned with the ESG agenda. Innovative technologies can
help mitigate climate risks; new age business models that entail the sharing of resources
could enable circular business; and ESG levers such as diversity, equity and inclusion could
strengthen the overall trust equation. Therefore, to enable a sustainable transformation over
the next decade, companies would need to incorporate such ESG components to retain,
upskill and motivate the workforce.
10 India Workforce Hopes and Fears Survey 2022
Many millennials are now in mid-management functions and, therefore,
in influencing positions. They often have a strong sense of values and
prioritise fairness and value addition to customers over making money.
These employees remain with the organisation once they realise the firm
is offering tangible value to its customers.
– Varun Dua, CEO, Acko General Insurance Ltd.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 16
The next steps
Employers need to think in a more holistic and integrated manner when developing the
employee value proposition, and focus on opportunities for creativity, innovation, authenticity
and meaning beyond financial reward. Accordingly, CEOs need to:
.question assumptions through a data-driven approach to broaden the understanding of
what drives employees
.democratise the workplace concept to focus on a ‘workplace of the people’
.prioritise culture as a competitive advantage
.use technology to enable productivity and performance
.provide opportunities to be one’s authentic best self at work.
As geopolitical risks rise, what new contingencies are you preparing for?
Geopolitical flashpoints have prompted CEOs to factor in disruptions in their scheme of
things. Responding to a question on what actions, if any, their company is considering for
the next 12 months because of the conflict in Europe, 67% of India CEOs say that they are
adjusting supply chains; 59% highlight they are diversifying products and services; 50%
emphasise that they are increasing investments in cybersecurity and data privacy, and 48%
mention adjusting their presence in current markets and/or expanding into new markets.
In response to the current environment, 93% of India CEOs (as against 85% of global CEOs
and 81% of Asia Pacific CEOs) say that they are reducing or planning to reduce operating
costs.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 17
India CEOs are adjusting supply chains in response to geopolitical conflict
9%
2%
3%
59%
48%
67%
50%
None of the above
Relocating physical assets
Relocating our workforce
Diversifying our product/service offering
Adjusting our presence in current markets and/or
expanding into new markets
Adjusting supply chains
Increasing investments in cybersecurity or data privacy
India
11%
9%
10%
41%
46%
46%
48%
None of the above
Relocating physical assets
Relocating our workforce
Diversifying our product/service offering
Adjusting our presence in current markets and/or
expanding into new markets
Adjusting supply chains
Increasing investments in cybersecurity or data privacy
Global
The priorities for global CEOs are different: 48% stress on cybersecurity and data privacy.
For most Asia Pacific CEOs, the most important action is adjusting markets or exploring new
ones (53%), followed by supply chains (49%), diversifying products or services (48%) and
increasing investments in cybersecurity or data privacy (47%).
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 18
PwC’s 2022 Digital Trust Insights Survey11 indicates that India business leaders believe
avoidable and unnecessary organisational complexity poses ‘concerning’ cyber and
privacy risks. A security focus that cuts across the entire business – from top leadership to
every department and across all employees – is key to instilling a culture of cyber security,
managing cyber risks, enhancing communication between boards and management, and
aligning cyber and business strategy.
India CEOs also underscore the need to include the impact of possible disruptions in
scenario planning and corporate operating models. Supply chains, for instance, in the
past have relied on siloed functions, limited data availability, manual decision making and
unconnected planning with limited options for customisation. The supply chain of the future
needs to be:
.customised to cater to specific expectations of service levels/product availability/pack
sizes
.made autonomous using AI and ML technology that can handle daily supply chain
scenarios, while leaders focus only on managing exceptions/extremely critical scenarios
.integrated through a supply chain control tower that would provide an end-to-end
integrated view across plan, source, make and deliver
.powered by data analytics and integrated planning solutions to drive the underlying
processes and optimisation requirements. A positive trend, indicated by a recent PwC
survey, is that India’s manufacturing sector has integrated supply chain planning among
its top priorities for 3–5 years.
11 2022 Digital Trust Insights Survey: India edition
Building flexibility in the supply chain is a more appropriate strategy than
aiming for complete resiliency in the first place. The COVID-19 pandemic
and the Russia-Ukraine conflict required Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories to bring
in this flexibility by vigilant day-to-day monitoring of the situation and
by reacting to these developments with agility. This flexibility led us to
attaining resilience in our supply chain.
– G. V. Prasad, Co-Chairman and Managing Director, Dr. Reddy’s
Laboratories
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 19
The next steps
CEOs need to prepare for both anticipated and unanticipated disruptions and security risks
to keep their businesses viable and growing. The need of the hour is to:
.plan scenarios for a wider range of disruptions, and invest in and develop more agile
supply chain strategies powered by data and technology to enable real-time responses
to crises before they occur
.customise to create a network of supply chains that is specifically tailored to customer
needs, and ensure connected dashboards of data, key business metrics, and events
personalised to decision-makers across the supply chain
.build rapid-response tech-savvy teams to handle crises and to ensure they are supported
.simplify the complex cybersecurity ecosystem and prioritise investments in the right
areas
.develop a dedicated leadership group that understands the significance of cybersecurity
and treats it as a priority.
A balanced agenda
How much time and money are you investing in the future?
To effectively navigate the dual challenge of dealing with the present while preparing for the
future, CEOs must perform a balancing act that starts with their own calendars. It appears
that for 26% of India CEOs, driving current operating performance ‘actually’ consumes the
biggest share of their time. Asked how they would ideally allocate their time if they could
start with a blank calendar, 24% of India CEOs say that they would like to spend more time
evolving their business and its strategy to meet future demands and 19%, ideally engaging
with and mentoring/developing employees.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 20
India CEOs want to ideally spend more time evolving their business and its strategy
3%
26%
23%
17%
16%
14%
4%
22%
24%
19%
20%
12%
Driving current operating performance (including board
engagement on current performance)
Evolving the business and its strategy to meet future
demands (including board engagement on long-term
direction)
Engaging with or mentoring/developing employees
Engaging with customers
Engaging with investors, government officials and other
external leaders
Other
Actual Ideal
It is also clear from the responses that technology- and reinvention-oriented investments are
a top priority for many CEOs. Around 85% of India respondents are investing in upskilling
their workforce in priority areas, 82% in automating processes and 81% in deploying
technology such as cloud and AI over the next 12 months.
Asked to what extent the different investment areas are needed to preserve their current
business and to reinvent for the future, both global and India CEOs flag investments in
deploying advanced technologies as a priority for reinventing the business for the future.
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 21
While upskilling (85%), automating processes (82%) and deploying technology (81%)
are the three top areas where companies are investing, deploying technology (61%) and
decarbonising the company’s business model (59%) are two top priorities for reinventing the
business for the future.
Base: Those respondents who are making an investment in any of these areas in the next 12 months
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
42% 42% 39%
47% 45% 41%
58% 58% 61%
53% 55% 59%
82% 85% 81% 56% 53% 51%
Automating
processes
and systems
Upskilling company’s
workforce in
 priority areas
Deploying
technology
(cloud, AI
and other
advanced tech)
Adjusting the
compan’s supply
chain (including
nearshoring/onshoring
operations)
Adopting alternative
energy sources
Decarbonising
the company’s
business model
Preserving current business Reinventing the business for the future
The power sector has huge growth potential and is poised to move to the
next level with a laser focus on renewable sources and their integration
with digital technologies, including storage, smart grid, smart metering
and other integrated solutions. These can help the country leapfrog
from conventional generation, transmission and distribution to a more
distributed power generation and electricity service model providing
better quality service to consumers.
– Dr. Praveer Sinha, CEO and Managing Director, Tata Power Co. Ltd
26th Annual Global CEO Survey: India perspective 22
The next steps
The balancing act facing India CEOs starts with his/her own calendar and extends to most
corporate resource allocation decisions. The CEOs need to:
.invest in upskilling as a lever to address talent shortage and provide training as required
.invest in technology to reinvent the business
.speed up investment in alternative energy sources and decarbonising.
