The main petitioner, Kesavananda Bharati, of Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors vs State of Kerala Case, 1973 (known for the basic structure doctrine of the Supreme Court), died on September 6th 2020 at the age of 79 in Idnir Math due to age-related ailments.
Brief Facts
Kesavananda Bharati was the chief pontiff of the Edneer Mutt, a monastic religious institution located in Kasaragod district, Kerala. Bharati had some land in the Mutt which he owned. The Kerala state government passed the Land Reforms Amendment Act in 1969. As per this Act, the government could acquire some of the lands that belonged to the Mutt. In March 1970, Bharati moved the Supreme Court (under Section 32 of the Constitution) to enforce the rights that were guaranteed to him under:

Article 25: Right to practice & propagate religion
Article 26: Right to manage religious affairs
Article 14: Right to equality
Article 19(1)(f): Freedom to acquire property
Article 31: Compulsory acquisition of property
Also read: Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles 25 – 28)

The Kerala state government enacted another law, the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971 even as the petition was under the court’s consideration.

The contentions made by the petitioners brought to the fore the validity of various amendments that were brought in by the Parliament to nullify the effects of Golaknath v State of Punjab. The petitioners challenged, in particular, three constitutional amendments – 24th Amendment, 25th Amendment and 29th Amendment and their validity.

Issues before the Court
Whether the following are constitutionally valid?
24th Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 1971
25th Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 1972
The extent to which the Parliament can exercise its power to amend the Constitution.
The question underlying the case also included: Was the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution unlimited? In other words, could Parliament alter, amend, abrogate any part of the Constitution even to the extent of taking away all fundamental rights?
Contentions of the Petitioners
Petitioners contended that the Parliament can’t amend the Constitution in a manner they want as their power to do this is limited. The Parliament cannot make an amendment to the Constitution to change its basic structure as was set forth by Justice Mudholkar in the Sajjan Singh v State of Rajasthan case.
They argued that the 24th & 25th Constitutional Amendments were violative of the Fundamental Right provided in Article 19(1)(f).
Contentions of the Respondents
The State said that the Parliament’s supremacy is the Indian legal system’s basic structure and hence, it has boundless power to amend the Constitution. The respondents stressed that in order to fulfil its socio-economic obligations the unlimited power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution must be upheld.
Aspirants of the upcoming UPSC Civil Services Exam should check the following relevant links to prepare comprehensively and even better –

25 Important Supreme Court Judgements	Habeas Corpus – Features, Cases,	Read More on Judicial Review
Indian Judiciary – Supreme Court, High Court, District Court	Judicial Activism – Definition, Types, Examples	Original Jurisdiction definition
Article 12 of the Indian Constitution	Doctrine of Laches – Meaning, Importance, Case	Anti Defection Law, Provisions under Tenth Schedule
What is Uniform Civil Code in India | Article 44	Doctrine of Severability	Directive Principle of State Policy (DPSP) – Article 36
Freedom of Speech and Expression [Article 19(1)	Tribunals in India – Tribunal Reforms Ordinance	Doctrine of Eclipse for UPSC Exam
Indra Sawhney vs Union of India (1992)	Vishakha Case Summary (1997)	Romesh Thapar Case (1950)
Kesavananda Bharati Case – Judgement
The landmark judgement was delivered on 24th April 1973 by a razor-thin majority of 7:6 wherein the majority held that any provision of the Indian Constitution can be amended by the Parliament in order to fulfil its socio-economic obligations that were guaranteed to the citizens as given in the Preamble, provided that such amendment did not change the Constitution’s basic structure. The minority, however, in their dissenting opinion, were wary of giving the Parliament unlimited amending power.
The court held that the 24th Constitutional Amendment was entirely valid. But it found the first part of the 25th Constitutional Amendment to be intra vires and the second part of the same ultra vires.
Doctrine of Basic Structure
The basic structure doctrine states that the Parliament has limitless power to amend the Constitution subject to the condition that such amendments should not change the Constitution’s basic structure. The bench did not mention the basic structure of the Constitution and it was left to the interpretation of the courts. This was subsequently laid down in several other judgements by the SC.

The court contended that the term ‘amend’ mentioned in Article 368 doesn’t imply amendments that can alter the Constitution’s basic structure. If the Parliament intends to make an amendment with respect to a constitutional provision, such an amendment would necessarily have to undergo the ‘basic structure’ test.

Conclusion
The case of Kesavananda Bharati vs the State of Kerala as mentioned supra had been heard for 68 days, the arguments commencing on October 31, 1972, and ending on March 23, 1973. The hard work and scholarship that had gone into the preparation of this case were breathtaking. Literally hundreds of cases had been cited and the then Attorney-General had made a comparative chart analysing the provisions of the constitutions of 71 different countries.

The majority of the bench wished to safeguard the Constitution by preserving its basic features. The judgment was based on sound reasoning and it was given after a careful analysis of multifarious aspects. The bench opined that if the Parliament were to get unfettered power to amend, there were chances of that power to be misused, and that governments would change it as per their own preferences and whims. Such limitless powers vested in the hands of the government would mean that the basic features and also the very essence and spirit of the Indian Constitution could be changed. There was a need for a doctrine which could protect the rights of both the Indian Parliament and Indian citizens; the bench met this need halfway and came up with the basic structure doctrine, that protects the rights of both camps. It is to be noted that while in the US, only 27 amendments have been made, India has seen over one hundred amendments since independence. Despite this big number, the spirit of the Constitution and also the ideas of the Constitution-makers have not been tampered with. It is because of the bench’s decision that the identity and spirit of the Constitution have not been lost. This landmark case has given our Constitution stability. Even though the petitioner lost this case partially, the SC ruling in the Kesavananda Bharati case turned out to be a saviour for Indian democracy, and also prevented the Constitution from losing its spirit.

Related Links
Polity Notes for UPSC	Polity MCQs
Topic-Wise GS 2 Questions for UPSC Mains	UPSC Notes PDF Download
Documents Required for UPSC Exam	Constitution Questions for UPSC Mains
Frequently Asked Questions related to Kesavananda Bharati case
What happened in Kesavananda Bharati case??
The case in which Bharati had challenged a Kerala Land Reform Act nearly four decades ago set the principle that the Supreme Court is the guardian of the basic structure of the constitution and the verdict involved 13 judges the largest bench ever to sit in the apex court.The case of Kesavananda Bharati vs the State of Kerala was heard for 68 days and continues to hold the top spot for the longest proceedings ever to have taken place in the top court. The Kesavananda Bharati case is significant for its ruling that the Constitution can be amended but not the basic structure.
Who won in Kesavananda Bharati case?
The landmark judgement was delivered on 24th April 1973 by a razor-thin majority of 7:6 wherein the majority held that any provision of the Indian Constitution can be amended by the Parliament in order to fulfill its socio-economic obligations that were guaranteed to the citizens as given in the Preamble, provided that such amendment did not change the Constitution’s basic structure. The minority, however, in their dissenting opinion, were wary of giving the Parliament unlimited amending power.
Which case is known as fundamental rights case?
The Kesavananda Bharati case was popularly known as fundamental rights case and also the serious conflict between the Judiciary and the Government.
Which case is popularly known as habeas corpus case?
The verdict in the ADM Jabalpur vs Shivakant case, popularly known as the Habeas Corpus case, set the tone for countless arrests under the preventive detention law – a provision whereby defendants could not stake a claim to their liberty under extenuating circumstances.
Can the preamble be amended?
It has been clarified by the Supreme Court that being a part of the Constitution, the Preamble can be subjected to Constitutional Amendments exercised under article 368, however, the basic structure cannot be altered. Therefore it is considered as the heart and soul of the Constitution.